A program is an executable file in ELF (Executable and Linkable Format) format.
A process is an instance of a program in execution state. It has unique process identifier (PID).
A process has various user and group IDs – real, effective and saved.
pid_t getpid(void) – Returns: process ID of calling process
pid_t getppid(void) – Returns: parent process ID of calling process
uid_t getuid(void) – Returns: real user ID of calling process
uid_t geteuid(void) – Returns: effective user ID of calling process
gid_t getgid(void) – Returns: real group ID of calling process
gid_t getegid(void) – Returns: effective group ID of calling process
Process control includes creation of new processes, program execution & process termination.

A program is:
  
  A file stored on disk
  Usually in ELF format on Linux
  Contains machine instructions + metadata
  Not running yet
  
  👉 Example: a.out, ls, cat, or any compiled C program.
Process
    A process is:
        
        A program that is loaded into memory
        Currently running or waiting
        Has a unique PID

Process ID (PID)

Every running process gets a unique number from the OS.
    Function:
        pid_t getpid(void);
        
        Returns PID of the calling process.
        Has its own memory, stack, file descriptors, registers, etc.

Parent Process ID (PPID)
    
    Every process has a parent.
    
    Function:
        pid_t getppid(void);
        
        Returns PID of your parent process.
    Example:
      
      Terminal runs your program → terminal is parent
      Your program's PPID = terminal’s PID

USER IDs and GROUP IDs
          Processes run under a user and a group, which determine permissions.
There are 3 types each:

✔ Real ID (UID/GID)
     The actual user who started the process.
✔ Effective ID (EUID/EGID)
    The user/group actually used for permission checking.
    Often different when running sudo or setuid programs.
Why do effective IDs exist?

Example:
passwd program allows updating /etc/shadow, which requires root permissions.

Real UID = your ID
    
    Effective UID = root
    
    Saved IDs
    
    They store your previous effective UID/GID so that a program can temporarily drop and regain privileges.
    
    Examples in system utilities.
