

Unix Systems Programming
Inter-Process Communication

Socket
    Most powerful and flexible network IPC

Works between:
  
    Same machine
    Different machines
    Supports TCP (stream socket) and UDP (datagram socket)
    Used in all network applications

Example:

    Web servers
    Chat apps
    Client-server programs

Pipes are the oldest form of UNIX System IPC and are provided by all UNIX systems.
                    $ who |   wc -1              
Pipes have two inherent limitations.
Historically, pipes have been half duplex (i.e., data flows in only one direction). Some systems now provide full-duplex pipes, but to ensure maximum portability full-duplex pipe is not assumed.
Pipes can be used only between processes that have a common ancestor.
Despite these limitations, half-duplex pipes are still the most commonly used form of IPC. 
Every time a sequence of commands in a pipeline is typed for the shell to execute, the shell creates a separate process for each command and links stdout of one process to stdin of next. 
A pipe is created by calling the pipe() system call.
int pipe(int fd[2])
Two file descriptors are returned through fd argument:
fd[0] is open for reading and fd[1] is open for writing.
The output of fd[1] is the input for fd[0].

Pipe
        
        Unidirectional (one-way)
        Data flows like: writer → pipe → reader
        Usually used between parent and child processes
        Does not have a name (anonymous)

simple, crystal-clear explanation of simplex, half-duplex, and full-duplex, especially useful for understanding pipes and communication systems.
Simplex Communication
👉 One-way communication

Data flows in ONLY one direction.
2. Half-Duplex Communication
👉 Two-way communication but NOT at the same time

Devices can send and receive but must take turns.
3. Full-Duplex Communication
👉 Two-way communication simultaneously

Both sides can send and receive at the same time.

Q. pipe() is a System Call

When you write:

int fd[2];
pipe(fd);

You are asking the kernel to create it.

pipe() switches the CPU from user mode → kernel mode, and the kernel does all the work internally.
✔ Step 2: Kernel creates two file descriptors

The OS returns:

fd[0] → read end

fd[1] → write end

These are entries in the process’s File Descriptor Table.
